Start on event-horizon tutorial (#83)
dolittle/Documentation: Source/content/en/docs/tutorials/event-horizon.md

---
title: Event Horizon
description: Get started with the Event Horizon
keywords: Learning, Quickstart, setup, prerequisites, how to, guide, walkthrough, csharp, c#, dotnet, .NET, typescript, javascript
author: joel, jakob, sindre
weight: 20
aliases:
- /docs/tutorials/csharp/event-horizon
- /docs/tutorials/typescript/event-horizon
- /docs/tutorials/event-horizon
---

Welcome to the tutorial for Dolittle, where you learn how to write a [Microservice]({{< ref "docs/concepts/overview#microservice" >}}) that keeps track of foods prepared by the chefs.

After this tutorial you will have:

* a running Dolittle environment with two [Runtimes]({{< ref "docs/concepts/overview" >}}) and a MongoDB,
* a [Microservice]({{< ref "docs/concepts/overview#microservice" >}}) that commits and handles [Events]({{< ref "docs/concepts/events" >}}) and puts it in a public stream and

> * a Microservice that subscribes to the public stream and processes those events

Author: That's nicer yes

<!-- check https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#tabs -->

This tutorial builds directly upon and that you have gone through our [getting started]({{< ref "docs/tutorials/getting_started" >}}) guide; that you have the files from the tutorial.

### Setup
In this tutorial is going to have a slightly different setup as we're going to have two microservices; one that produces public events and one that subscribe to those public events. For that reason you should have a folder structure to resembles that. I would recommend this particular folder structure for this tutorial:

    event-horizon-tutorial
        consumer
            ...
        producer
            ...
        environment
            docker-compose.yml
            ...

Go into both the *consumer* and the *producer* folders and initiate the project as we've gone through in our [getting started]({{< ref "docs/tutorials/getting_started" >}}) guide. I.e copy over all the code from the getting started tutorial to the *consumer* and *producer* folders.

We'll come back to the docker-compose later in this tutorial.

## Producer
### Create a `Public Filter`

> A `public filter` filters all events that are committed as public events into a [`public stream`]({{< ref "docs/concepts/streams" >}}), which is special stream that another microservice can subscribe to. A public filter definition in the SDK's perspective is simply a method that returns a partitioned filter result which simply is an object with two properties: a boolean that says whether the event should be included in the stream and a partition id which is the partition that the event should belong to in the stream. Only the events that are committed as a public events gets filtered through the public filters.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `public filter` filters all events that are committed as public events into a [`public stream`]({{< ref "docs/conceptsA [`public filter`]({{< ref "docs/concepts/event_handlers_and_filters#public-filters" >}}) filters all public events that pass the filter into a [`public stream`]({{< ref "docs/concepts/streams" >}}), which is special stream that another microservice can [subscribe]({{< ref "docs/concepts/event_horizon#subscription" >}}) to.

A public filter is defined as a method that returns a partitioned filter result, which is an object with two properties:
- a boolean that says whether the event should be included in the public stream
- a partition id which is the [partition]({{< ref "docs/concepts/streams/#partitions" >}}) that the event should belong to in the public stream.

Only public events get filtered through the public filters.  
```

Added some line breaks, links and broke the long sentence down.

        public static void Main()
        {
            var client = Client
                .ForMicroservice("f39b1f61-d360-4675-b859-53c05c87c0e6")
                .WithEventTypes(eventTypes =>
                    eventTypes.Register<DishPrepared>())
                .WithEventHandlers(builder =>
                    builder.RegisterEventHandler<DishHandler>())
                .WithFilters(filtersBuilder =>
                    filtersBuilder
                        .CreatePublicFilter("2c087657-b318-40b1-ae92-a400de44e507", filterBuilder =>
                            filterBuilder.Handle((@event, eventContext) =>
                            {
                                Console.WriteLine($"Filtering event {@event} to public stream");
                                return Task.FromResult(new PartitionedFilterResult(true, PartitionId.Unspecified));
                            })))
                .Build();
            // Rest of your code here...
        }
    }
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}
```typescript
// index.ts
import { Client } from '@dolittle/sdk';
import { TenantId } from '@dolittle/sdk.execution';
import { DishPrepared } from './DishPrepared';

> import { DishHandler } from './DishHandler';

Reviewer: Should also import the `PartitionId`, ties into that we should update the samples in the SDK's to check for code errors

Author: Should be fixed by https://github.com/dolittle/Documentation/pull/83/commits/4ffdbfcd742bd9e386d6f7d922c76b5a63ee7406

const client = Client
    .forMicroservice('f39b1f61-d360-4675-b859-53c05c87c0e6')
    .withEventTypes(eventTypes =>
        eventTypes.register(DishPrepared))
    .withEventHandlers(builder =>
        builder.register(DishHandler))
    .withFilters(filterBuilder =>
        filterBuilder
            .createPublicFilter('2c087657-b318-40b1-ae92-a400de44e507', fb =>
                fb.handle((event: any, context: EventContext) => {
                    console.log(`Filtering event ${event} to public stream`);
                    return new PartitionedFilterResult(true, PartitionId.unspecified);
                })
            ))
    .build();
    // Rest of your code here...

```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> Notice that the returned PartitionedFilterResult always has true and the *unspecified* PartitionId. This means that this particular public stream includes all public events and they are put in the *unspecified* partition (which is the empty guid)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the returned PartitionedFilterResult has `true` and an *unspecified* PartitionId (which is the same as an empty GUID). This means that this filter creates a public stream that includes all public events, and that they are put into the *unspecified* partition of that stream.
```

Simplified the text a bit, what do you think?

### Commit the public event

> Now that we have a public stream we'd naturally want to commit public events to fill it up. Doing this is as easy as committing private (non-public) events. Let's show you an example where we commit a *DishPrepared* event as a public event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have a public stream we can commit public events to start filtering them. Let's commit a *DishPrepared* event as a public event from the producer microservice:
```

Simplified

{{< tabs name="commit_public_tab" >}}
{{% tab name="C#" %}}
```csharp
// Program.cs
using Dolittle.SDK;
using Dolittle.SDK.Tenancy;

namespace Kitchen
{
    class Program
    {
        public static void Main()
        {
            // Where you build the client...

            var preparedTaco = new DishPrepared("Bean Blaster Taco", "Mr. Taco");

            client.EventStore
                .ForTenant(TenantId.Development)
                .CommitPublicEvent(preparedTaco, "bfe6f6e4-ada2-4344-8a3b-65a3e1fe16e9")
                .GetAwaiter().GetResult();

            // Blocks until the EventHandlers are finished, i.e. forever
            client.Start().Wait();
        }
    }
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}
```typescript
// index.ts
import { Client } from '@dolittle/sdk';
import { TenantId } from '@dolittle/sdk.execution';
import { DishPrepared } from './DishPrepared';
import { DishHandler } from './DishHandler';

// Where you build the client...

const preparedTaco = new DishPrepared('Bean Blaster Taco', 'Mr. Taco');

client.eventStore
    .forTenant(TenantId.development)

>     .commit(preparedTaco, 'bfe6f6e4-ada2-4344-8a3b-65a3e1fe16e9');

Reviewer: TypeScript missing the correct code

Author: https://github.com/dolittle/Documentation/pull/83/commits/4ffdbfcd742bd9e386d6f7d922c76b5a63ee7406

                .fromProducerStream('2c087657-b318-40b1-ae92-a400de44e507')
                .fromProducerPartition(PartitionId.unspecified.value)
                .toScope('808ddde4-c937-4f5c-9dc2-140580f6919e');
            });
    })
    .build();

```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}
Now as you can see there is lots of stuff going on here. Let's try and disect this piece for piece.

{{< tabs name="with-runtime-on-tab" >}}
{{% tab name="C#" %}}
```csharp
// Program.cs
.WithRuntimeOn("localhost", 50055)
// Rest of builder here...

```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}
```typescript
// index.ts
.withRuntimeOn('localhost', 50055)
// Rest of builder here...

```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}
The previous tutorials has not used this builder method before. The reason for that is that there was no need as the default value of this configuration is having a Runtime running on localhost on port 50053.
Since we in this tutorial will end up with two running instances of the Runtime they will have to run with different ports. The *producer* Runtime will be running on the default 50053 port and the consumer Runtime will be running on port 50055.

> We'll see this reflected in the `docker-compose.yml` file later in this tutorial.

Author: I've merged that PR so I'll mark this as resolved

We'll come back to how this is setup later.

#### Scoped Event Handler
So now that we have a consumer microservice that has subscribed to the producer's public stream `2c087657-b318-40b1-ae92-a400de44e507` the natural progression for us would be to register an event handler that handles those events. This code sequence also introduces a new way of creating event handlers. Previously we've made event handlers as classes in separated files, but the Client Builder gives us the opportunity to create these directly.
This code will create a partitioned event handler with id `6c3d358f-3ecc-4c92-a91e-5fc34cacf27e`. That should feel familiar. The thing that may not be familiar is the *scope* part.
Remember that the event horizon subscription includes a scope and that the events from the that event horizon gets put in a specialized event-log identified by the scope id. Having the scope id defined when creating an event handler signifies that it will only handle events that are put into that scope and no other. Read more about event handlers and scopes [here]({{< ref "docs/concepts/event_handlers_and_filters#scope" >}}).

> You can read more about the event horizon [here]({{< ref "docs/concepts/event_handlers_and_filters#scope" >}}).

Author: I've merged in that PR so I'll mark this as reolved

## Setup your environment

> Now that we have the different microservices setup with the code we need to setup the environment for them to run in and configure them to be connected to each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we have the producer and consumer microservices [Heads]({{< ref "docs/concepts/overview#components" >}}) coded, we need to setup the environment for them to run in and configure their Runtimes to be connected.
```

I added the first mention of "Heads" here, could've done that earlier or maybe we can just talk about them as microservices?
